[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> REGINA MEREDITH: It has not
been lost on any of you that
are human behavior is having
a negative impact on our host,
Mother Earth.
Martin Ogle, a naturalist with
a degree in wildlife sciences,
is our guest today, and we'll
be discussing the incredibly
intricate dance that occurs
between Earth's mind and ours
and what happens when we forget
that we're part of a whole.
Welcome, Martin.
>> MARTIN OGLE: Thank you.
>> REGINA: It's good
to have you here.
This is a really
important topic I
mean, we read the headlines
and everyone just goes,
ah, what are we going to do?
And then we hear all
the reports coming out.
We've reached that
tipping point.
The next extinction
is on its way.
And people, like the wonderful
people watching this show,
who care about such
things feel hopeless,
like there's nothing
more we can do.
There's nothing
that can be done.
No amount of intervention
is going to save us now.
And that's what the evening
headlines would indicate,
on one hand, and then
on the other hand,
depending on which
station you're watching,
eh, there's nothing
wrong, there's
no such thing as climate change.
So here, we're
having, hopefully,
a very wise and grounded
and calming discussion
about our need for maturity.
>> OGLE: Hope so.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
So first of all, I want to
talk about you as a little kid.
You led a different kind
of life than most people
watching who were born and
raised in the Western world.
You weren't.
And so tell us
about your childhood
and how you ended up being
raised for a number of years
in South Korea.
>> OGLE: Yeah.
Well, I was born there and
lived 10 of my first 14
years in South Korea.
My father was a
Methodist missionary,
and the work that he did was
largely industrial relations,
work in steel mills
and coal mines
and trying to get labor
rights for workers.
That was why he went
there or how he got there.
So I was born there
and lived there
and lived a, now I realize,
quite different life than most
people here.
>> REGINA: So let's talk
about the differences,
because this shaped who you are,
about what it was like being
raised in the East where you
have this, what seems to be,
kind of very dramatic
and even harsher climate
and environment,
in a certain way,
with these mountains and so
forth that you were playing
in as a kid.
Let's talk about
life in the East
and life in that
environment and how
you started really connecting
with this notion of time
and Earth.
>> OGLE: Korea is a very
mountainous country.
Otherwise and similarly,
it's very much like Virginia,
where I lived much of my life,
in climate and topography
and everything.
It is very highly
populated, however,
and so I grew up in a very
crowded, dense environment,
and I was pretty much
the only Caucasian child
to be found other
than my sisters.
And that kind of, obviously,
set a tone for my life.
But one of the things
that I really loved to do
was to go up in the
mountains and go mountain
climbing with my
father or whoever else.
And that obviously set
a very meaningful part
of my young existence that got
me into the kinds of things
that I love to do now.
>> REGINA: Was being in nature
or a part of nature part
of the Eastern
culture at that time?
>> OGLE: Yeah, I think so.
At that time, of course, Korea
was only about 15 years out
of the war when I was first
to third, fourth grade.
And it was a very
decimated landscape.
And so it was a different
thing kind of going out,
quote, unquote, "into nature."
But then and even now, people
love to go mountain climbing.
You'll go anywhere,
even in Seoul,
and some of the mountains that
are right in and around Seoul
always have people
all over them.
>> REGINA: Many years ago,
probably when you were--
because you're a
little younger than me,
so probably when you
were a kid there,
I would fly in and out because
I worked with an airline,
World Airways, who was flying
troops in and out of Seoul,
right?
And I remember the landscape.
I was there in the winter.
And I remember the
landscape at the time
and thinking how stark it
was from my point of view,
but now we're probably coming
in through military base is
my guess, looking back on it.
But I remember
just kind of the--
there was a certain
Spartan quality to it,
but there was a
real beauty in that.
And then I was
seeing the mounds,
the burial mounds and such
that I had never seen before,
and was just having people
explain all of it and all
the scents of the
kimchi barrels,
once we were in
the towns and such,
and such a completely different
sensual experience compared
to living, growing up--
well, I'm from San Francisco
and Marin County--
very different, obviously.
>> OGLE: Yeah.
>> REGINA: Part of what
I'm getting at, too,
is the nature of life
because you were living more
their life.
It's not like you were moving
into an expat community
with a bunch of
Europeans and Americans
and the pace and the
way we do things.
You were moving in with the
pace of another group of people.
>> OGLE: Yeah.
My first five years, we
lived in a house that
was in a Korean
neighborhood and pretty much
a Korean-style
house for the time.
In later years, we moved
into a slightly bigger, more
kind of Western-style
house, but we were still
within the Korean community,
and that did make a difference.
I mean, looking back
on how I grew up
and comparing it to how
my kids grew up now,
it was a very different world.
And the time aspect that we've
brought up here, I think,
did make a difference.
But I think that
that's something that
is found all over the place.
50 years ago, life was slower
no matter where you were.
>> REGINA: Yes, indeed.
>> OGLE: And so it
was slower there,
and it was lived at a pace
that kind of, I think,
is more commensurate with
the human body and mind.
>> REGINA: And philosophically,
was the Korean understanding
that they were part of nature
and nature is part of us,
we're all one and the same?
That's abstract thinking
for a little kid.
Did any of that
feeling come up then?
Like here, the Native
American culture, for example,
is known for never
having disconnected
from Mother Earth,
Father Sky, and so forth.
Yeah.
>> OGLE: Yeah.
As a child, it would have
been a little bit abstract.
But what carried
through is that there
was a lot of different
religious traditions
that were already there,
and then Christianity
was being mixed into
that and so forth.
So you had Buddhism, and even
the ancient shamanism was still
present and Shintoism.
It was all there and I think
informed people's lives
in different ways.
I can't speak to it
in a scholarly way.
But looking back on it,
I feel like my resonance
with a lot of feelings
about, for instance,
this Gaia theory idea that
I'd been very much into--
I was very amenable to
that because just the way
I thought being steeped in
that culture and that language.
That's a hypothesis
that I have about why I
came to love this idea so much.
>> REGINA: And explain
what the idea is.
>> OGLE: The Gaia theory idea?
>> REGINA: Yes, yes.
>> OGLE: Well, so Gaia
theory, as a science,
is the scientific idea that
Earth is a single living
system.
And sometimes people
quibble about words,
like is it an organism
or a cell or whatever,
but I just feel like it's
a single living system.
And that's scientifically
verifiable.
It basically is our present
earth system science.
But the source of the
metaphor Gaia, I think,
ties into that science
and is an interesting part
of the history of it.
>> REGINA: Explain that, Gaia.
>> OGLE: The scientist who
came up with this idea,
his name is James
Lovelock, and he is a Brit.
And he was hired by
NASA back in the 1960s
to find out whether or not
there was life on Mars.
And he came and he worked
with folks like Carl Sagan,
and they said, how are we
going to determine this?
And at that time, you
couldn't go to Mars,
but you could measure the
atmosphere of other planets.
And so they did that.
And just based, basically, on
the composition of the Martian
atmosphere, he came
to the conclusion
that there was no life
on Mars because it
was a static atmosphere,
an atmosphere that might be
kind of like an EKG going flat.
Nothing's happening.
>> REGINA: At least nothing
detectable at that time.
>> OGLE: Detectable
at that time--
that's true.
But based on that, he told NASA
that he didn't think that there
was any life on Mars.
Having had a chance to talk with
him, he said that then at least
we proved that there
was life on Earth.
And he kind of
chuckles a little bit
because his point was that that
was his flash of insight where
you're saying, we weren't
really even testing
to see if there was
life on the planet.
We were testing to see
if the planet itself,
in some way, shape, or
form, was a living system.
And so he saw what is on Earth
and our atmospheric composition
and said that,
well, really, Earth
is a living system, the whole
thing, the rock, the water,
the air, the organisms.
And that's where his
Gaia hypothesis, then,
was born just out of
that simple insight.
>> REGINA: Interesting.
>> OGLE: Yea.
>> REGINA: Our ancestors knew
you couldn't separate from
the Earth, that they were part
of this living system of Gaia.
And so at what point
in our Western history
did we start removing ourselves
and considering ourselves
above the Earth which has
given birth to all of us?
>> OGLE: Well, that's
a big question,
and I'm not a scholar either.
But having really been
interested in, first,
the science, and then
how our culture views
that science, and
then the metaphor,
I have my ideas on it.
And I think it's where we
started to separate things
out even conceptually.
So the term "Gaia" is
from ancient Greece,
the ancient Greek
Goddess of Earth.
But shortly into, like, say,
the classical Greek period,
we had a time period where
we were separating out words
already so that, for instance,
"physis" was originally
the Greek word for nature.
And then there were separations
into "physis" became more
the physical world, and
"bios," which previously was
a way of life or the human
existence in the Earth,
became biology and separated out
into those kinds of thoughts.
And then later on in Europe,
we really ran with that.
We named entire disciplines--
geology, and biology,
and geometry, et cetera.
And so we began to
separate our thinking.
And then once our
thinking became separated,
we didn't have the
intuitive connection
to seeing that those used to
be just viscerally thought
as one and the same.
>> REGINA: And yet, in the
sort of mystical sense,
during the same ages,
it was understood.
Again, you have you scientists
of the day, of course,
who began parting it
out characteristically,
the features of what
Earth represented.
And then you still had
the mystical sects,
which carried forward more
ancient knowledge, which
actually considered the
Earth as an entity herself,
as among the other planets,
almost as having ruling
entities, archangels
that were giving
guidance to the development
of all these planets.
So it's interesting
because, at that time,
those philosophies
were not non-existence.
They were running
alongside, and they
were highly respected
among certain groups
of people and even the
masses, to a large extent.
So the masses still
believed that Mother Earth
is an entity that has
intelligence and gives
us guidance.
But somewhere
along the way, that
was squashed out completely.
Right?
>> OGLE: I think that what
you're describing happened,
but also that it
was a slow process,
that it didn't happen overnight.
And an example of that is
if you take a geology course
these days you find out
that Robert Hutton was
the father of geology.
This was back in the 1700s.
He was a medical
doctor by training,
and he came to see Earth
as having a physiology,
and he was interested
in the rocks and kind
of geologic principles
as understanding
the physiology of the planet.
He actually called
it a super organism.
So even at that point
in European history,
there was still a lot of
understanding and carryover
of kind of more ancient
views of things,
of Earth as being a mother
and our source of life.
But then, as time went on,
those separations continued,
and I dare say that most
geology students today
don't know that
"g" is from "Gaia"
and that Robert Hutton
was a medical doctor
and that he was interested
in Earth as a super organism.
So we slowly start to
separate over time.
>> REGINA: Well, and then with
that came what I consider to be
a type of arrogance in which,
as we developed our intellect,
especially as education became
more available to the masses
and such, as we began to
develop the intellect,
we started forgetting about
the notion of intelligence.
I think it's very
difficult to even conceive
of what could fashion something
like an Earth, no less
a rose blossom, you know?
What can fashion
something like that?
What kind of intelligence can
make for such complex systems
depending upon one another?
And again, this notion of
intellect versus intelligence--
natural intelligence.
Can you flow into
that a little bit?
>> OGLE: The word "arrogance"
is interesting to me, too,
because, especially these
days, I think everyone is kind
of at odds and loggerheads,
and we consider the other side
arrogant.
So I like to think more that we
really think that we're right.
>> REGINA: We think we're right.
>> OGLE: Yeah.
And it's based on our
experience and our knowledge
and everything about us.
And so we end up entrenching
into different sides,
I think, a little bit
too easily these days.
But what I'm
interested in is maybe
finding out if we can
talk to each other
about each other's
intelligences and intellect
in order to figure out
the best understanding.
So for instance, even this
idea of how Earth came to be,
that's going to be probably
forever swathed the mystery.
>> REGINA: Right.
I mean, and that's
a question that's--
it's a valid question that
needs to be talked about.
>> OGLE: Right.
And there is a lot of scientific
understanding of that,
but that still goes back
to ultimate realities
that I don't know
that we'll ever
be able to solve
even scientifically.
But the thing about
language growing up--
one of the reasons
why I came to think
that I did resonate
with the Gaia theory
is that the Gaia theory
implies that there's systems
and balance can emerge with
no forethought, just out
of its own accord, just out
of the natural way of things.
And when I found out as an adult
that the character for nature
that's often used in the Orient,
stemming from the Chinese,
is two characters, "of
itself so, of itself so,"
and it's the same word that's
often used for "spontaneous--"
in other words, there's
no need to conceive
a committee or a single
power, although that
could be creating the Earth.
You get a order and a balance
and a harmony that arises out
of a system, of itself so.
And so if we were to talk
to each other in those ways,
maybe we'd find
out that we kind of
feel the same, even though
we're using different language.
More and more of that might
lead to better understanding
and agreement between people
rather than loggerheads.
>> REGINA: Right.
But then we have to
assume we don't already
know all the answers.
>> OGLE: Yes, absolutely.
>> REGINA: That's a problem.
That's a problem that can--
it's not a problem
that can't be fixed,
but it's a problem
at the moment,
especially as we look
at how polarized society
and viewpoints have become.
But then let's extend
that notion out to nature.
Everything is
based on opposites.
Everything is based on the
need for the poles to interact.
There's polarity in everything,
positive and negative, right?
And so that's essential just for
creation itself on all levels.
And yet, at the same time,
the Earth and all systems
are naturally
seeking homeostasis.
So to me, it's a really
interesting prospect
that humanity-- if we can
kind of go along that line
that you're talking
about and finding
that way culturally and
socially between us,
it's like there is a
point to the polarity
because it does bring
different knowledge bases
and such into the
equation, but ultimately it
has to result in homeostasis.
And homeostasis
isn't exactly what
society's aiming at right now.
>> OGLE: Yeah.
Homeostasis, of
course, is one thing
that scientists have had a
little problem with in terms
of the Gaia theory because
they say, oh, Earth
has never had a homeostasis.
In other words,
conditions have always
changed through vast
periods of time.
But what is true is there's
been vast periods of homeostasis
within that.
>> REGINA: Yes, exactly.
>> OGLE: So for instance, so we
have 21% oxygen and it's proved
that that's probably been that
case for about 200 million
years, a nice healthy
chunk of time.
>> REGINA: Right, enough
to allow life to flourish.
>> OGLE: Life as we know it
today because life before
flourished in a different--
>> REGINA: In a
different way-- yeah.
>> OGLE: --world
in a different way.
>> REGINA: Different species.
>> OGLE: And so for
us as human beings,
I guess my concern is that
we don't change that existing
homeostasis too much such that
it would become harmful for us
and our immediate descendants.
It will change eventually,
and we may or may not
be a part of the mix.
But right now,
it'd be good if we
could have our grandkids
live in a world that's
somewhat the same as ours.
>> REGINA: Well, this
is part of the problem.
We are part of that
mix of the change.
Let's just talk about
some of the challenges
because these aren't things
that are unknown to the viewers,
but what the implications of
this mean in the long term.
For example, the oxygen
rates of this planet
as a result of
deforestation alone,
what's happening with this?
>> OGLE: Well, I think the
oxygen rates themselves right
now are still
pretty close to 21%.
In fact, you couldn't
have large vertebrates
of any kind living at 17%.
So that's one of
the clues that we
have that it's never dropped
below that over, say, 200
million years.
>> REGINA: Well,
that's good news.
>> OGLE: Yeah, that's good news.
But other things,
notably carbon dioxide,
are going in slight but
very significant directions,
and that's just a fact.
And its impact on
climate, for instance,
that's already happened is
also factual and verifiable.
The impact into the future, we
can argue about it all we want,
but the scientific
read right now
is that it's headed in really
dangerous ways for humanity.
>> REGINA: Because we're
talking about the environment,
we're talking about becoming
responsible grown ups
and working within
this living system,
as part of this living system,
it's certainly fair to point
out where we've been
living outside of that.
And a lot of that has to do
with what I call ignorance
in the truest sense of the word,
which is not that we don't have
knowledge, that we choose to
ignore it, for the most part,
which is what ignorance
is, is to ignore.
And so if we choose to
live in this ignorance,
obviously what you're
just talking about,
we're headed down
a particular path.
But then, again, you look at
some of the-- one little bit
I've been on recently is the
notion of just the one out
of thousands and thousands
of problems, which
is what's dropping on us
from the sky, heavy aluminum
loads from jet fuel and also
chemtrails and contrails alike,
and just what this
one thing does to all
the species on the planet.
And yet, when it comes to the
subject of climate change--
these things actually change
climate, literally move weather
fronts and so forth--
the subject never even comes up.
How can you even begin a
discourse on climate change
when you're changing the
climate literally in the sky
and not acknowledging it?
>> OGLE: Well, I guess one
read on that is that there are
so many-- you bring up aluminum,
and there's so many other ways,
whether it be CO2 or
aluminum or whatever else,
that are concurrently happening.
Therefore, it's almost
impossible for any one person
to be totally aware of all the
different things happening.
But it seems to me like
the single unifying factor
is that we continue to produce
more and more new things
and more and more stuff and
use it and put it into the air
kind of haphazardly.
And so scientifically,
we're kind
of approaching our lives
in a sloppy manner,
and we're making things
bad for ourselves
and for future generations.
>> REGINA: OK.
So now let's go back to
one of the simplest things.
And this is what I
was really intrigued
with about your work is we're
looking at some of what we're
doing on more of a technological
and substantive level and just
material level to planet Earth.
We know we have problems.
We know we have to
find our way out.
Honestly, I don't understand
how that's going to happen.
It's almost like
the human species
and the Earth is
just going to have
to adapt to this reality
we've created because who's
going to change it, really?
I mean, we can change
certain policies, absolutely.
We can certainly
change where it has
to do with some of
the kind of toxins
we talked about a moment
ago, but not the huge load.
Just take a flight alone.
Who's going to stop flying?
Who's going to stop these
industries from happening?
Who's going to stop that
load on the environment?
Nobody's willing to
give up the perks
that they've come to
appreciate of modern life
to a significant extent.
So if that's the case,
let's take the conversation
beyond that.
Earth does adapt.
Earth is going to be here
long after we're gone.
Species are going
to become extinct.
Other species will
be able to thrive
in whatever the new
environment is, I suppose.
And we can just look at
it as our species may
be one of those that just
isn't able to really adapt
quickly enough or maybe we
will be super fast adapters.
I don't know what that is.
But one thing we can get back
to is this notion of mind.
Obviously, Gaia has
an incredibly complex
intelligence.
And I've also read, in
other books and such,
even it's her, its own
emotions and so forth.
It's a complex,
multidimensional being
just as we're complex,
multidimensional beings.
So how do our minds and
our emotions work together?
>> OGLE: That's a really
interesting question.
And one thing I like to
think of is that we ourselves
are just seamlessly
interconnected with Gaia,
with life, with our world
such that we grew out of her.
And therefore, everything about
us did, including our minds,
including the ways we think.
And so I used to think
in a metaphoric sense,
but now I think, really,
in a literal sense.
When we as human beings acquired
all the different skills
that we have and abilities
and we invented a camera,
and then we invented
a spacecraft
and went out to outer space
and took a picture back,
that that was quite literally
Earth becoming self-conscious.
It's kind of an interesting
thing to think of it--
>> REGINA: That's interesting.
>> OGLE: --as literally,
not just metaphoric,
because if we did evolve out
of this planet and our minds
and everything about us did
evolve out of this planet,
then that's quite
literally what it is.
And if we start to think in
that way, at least to me,
it gives us a new view,
perhaps an optimistic view,
that we could evolve fast
enough to do things differently
in the short term, short
term meaning let's get
our policy and our actions and
everything fixed in short order
so that our kids and
grandkids have a good life
to expect into the future.
And one of the
practical ways in which
I've been interested
about that is just,
what would it take for us
to imagine and then create
a truly green
economy, as they say,
not a green-washed economy,
but a green economy in which we
really did things differently,
fundamentally differently,
so that we could live more in
homeostasis with the systems
around us?
And I think it's possible.
>> REGINA: I think it is, too.
And in fact, I love
that topic, so I
would like you to share that,
your thoughts on that with us
and your idea of what these--
and I know this isn't your job
to create these systems,
but just your vision of what
these systems could look
like so people can get
an idea in their own
minds is how they could
begin to even think this way and
start contributing in this way.
>> OGLE: Well, first would be at
least an awareness that things
don't always have to be
the way they are now.
So it's not just our
human nature necessarily
just to go consuming
ourselves to death
and hurrying ourselves
to death and plunging off
into the darkness
with those behaviors,
that people have lived
differently in the past
and have envisioned
different ways of living now.
There's entire groups
of people that have
chosen to live differently now.
So at least that's a
starting point where--
>> REGINA: Give us some examples
of what you think are really
good models for this.
>> OGLE: Well, even if you
just take between Europe
and the United States, Europeans
literally consume about half
the resources per
capita than we do.
And so in the modern
world and what
we would still call a
very first-world nation,
there's people living very
differently than we do.
And I would say that they
profess their own happiness
and well-being as being at
least as good if not better
than our own.
So there's one model.
Then you could go to any
number of other countries
around the world where they
use vastly less resources.
And yes, they have
their own challenges
of health and
pollution and so forth,
but maybe that's
because they're immersed
in kind of the first
world at the same time.
>> REGINA: They're trying to
play catch-up on the material
plane.
>> OGLE: They're
playing catch-up.
But in the meantime,
many are living
lives that are happy
and well adjusted
and meaningful to them.
So there's a whole
range of different ways
that we can live in this world.
If we start there, then
we have created potential
to change our lives in ways
that won't look anything
like they do today.
They'll look very differently.
But they have potential
to live on through time.
>> REGINA: It seems like
one of the hallmarks,
as you were talking about,
even as the differences between
Europeans and Americans, is that
there isn't the incredible rush
for instant gratification
through consumption.
>> OGLE: Yeah, at least
not to the level we are.
>> REGINA: That's what
I'm saying, not as much.
>> OGLE: Yeah.
Having grown up in Korea and
revisited there a couple times,
I would say, just as off the
cuff, that in Korea and Japan,
maybe China these days, wherever
the economy is roaring along,
we are more hurried and harried
than other parts of the world.
There's other challenges that
other parts of the world face.
But as far as being really
hurried and harried,
that's an affliction of rapid
economic growth, I think.
>> REGINA: I think so.
Even, as you say,
40, 50 years ago,
when a young couple got
married, they would maybe
be gifted some things for their
household, the development
of their household, or they
would get their money together
and credit wasn't extended
so much at that time,
and they would buy
the necessary things,
and they'd buy
good things, solid,
made-in-America maple furniture
of the 1950s is a good example.
But then a household might
have that same furniture--
those people might have it
most of their lives, things
that were made well and that
they paid decent money for,
they respected, took
care of, and that
was your household furniture.
You didn't just change
with a new edition
of a fashion magazine or
an architectural magazine.
You didn't just throw
out your old furniture
and bring in the new.
That's what I was
talking about, this more
of an instant gratification.
Same thing in Europe and
America where people would
buy clothing that would last.
You'd wear the same wool
coat for maybe five, 10,
15 years because it was
made well to begin with,
and it wasn't about
having to have
a new statement every year.
It was about having something
good that serviced you year
after year.
That thinking is
pretty much gone.
I mean, that's not a
reflection of our world today.
You have to have the
newest whatever you think
is going to meet approval
in that time period
to be with the fashion or a
certain amount of boredom,
the affliction of boredom,
like, eh, I want to change the--
I don't like my
apartment anymore.
I think I'm going to
swap this out if you can.
So this notion of this
gratification on a material
level is really, I
think, deeply at the core
of this materialistic,
consumptive characteristic
of our culture and the
destruction it's causing.
>> OGLE: Yeah.
And it's because of
the way we think,
because we're driven to
do those things because we
feel like we need to keep up.
The old phrase was, "Keep
up with the Joneses."
And now it's really gone to a
much greater extent than even
in the '50s, '60s, and '70s.
It's a matter of diminishing
returns, I guess you could say,
that we probably benefited
from a lot of the material
and health and other gains
that our society provided us.
But then, if we continue
to go faster and faster
and feel like we
need more and more,
we disconnect ourselves
from our surroundings.
We're talking about
disconnecting from nature.
Well, one aspect of nature that
would disconnect ourselves from
is a much slower pace of life.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> OGLE: And so we come to
consider that the only way
to live is faster and faster
or as fast as we're going now,
at least, and to purchase
more and more new items.
>> REGINA: And we're being
persuaded to do this through
the media machine
that we're bathed in.
Suggestions are everywhere.
You can't drive down
a street in a city
and not have suggestions
coming at you as to what
you should be consuming next.
I mean, the documentary I love
is called "Century of Self,"
absolutely brilliant, talking
about the art of persuasion
starting in the 1920s
and '30s and what's
happened to our
cultures as a result
of these persuasive forces that
put us into a consumptive mode.
I mean, that's all
we're really being
encouraged to do is to consume.
>> OGLE: Yeah.
And if you were to
look at that way,
then we're being prodded to be
dissatisfied with the things
that we have.
>> REGINA: Yes, absolutely.
>> OGLE: And I'm wondering
if it's possible that,
about this time, we, in
fact, are starting to become
dissatisfied at being
constantly dissatisfied.
>> REGINA: Yes, that's
a perfect way to put it.
>> OGLE: And I wonder if younger
generations are, in fact,
at that point where there
are notable trends where less
homeownership and car ownership
and so forth and that it might
be part of a new understanding,
a new awareness of who we are
and what is meaningful because
we've become dissatisfied
at being prodded
to be dissatisfied.
>> REGINA: Dissatisfied--
I love that.
That's a perfect way to put it.
And I see evidence
of this, as well,
particularly in the
younger generations where
they're wanting to do more,
not necessarily own so much.
Obviously, future
generations are always
the key to any kind of healing
process that's going to happen.
And I think you're right.
I see that.
We're not wanting to
be manipulated and told
what to do in the
ways generations
up until now have accepted.
>> OGLE: I think that's true.
And relating it a little bit
to what we were talking about
earlier with this whole
understanding of Earth
as a system and the wisdom
that our ancestors had,
I feel like we do need to link
this new trend of young people
to both of those things,
the scientific understanding
of Earth as living
system and the fact
that all of our
forbearers have understood
Earth and our relationship
to be different, because then
their desire to do
things differently
is rooted in some
real firm foundation
rather than just
kind of reactive.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> OGLE: My worry would be that
if it's just reactive, well,
then once they kind of discover
that it doesn't work for them
in any way, shape,
or form, well,
then they'll just get
back on the bandwagon.
But if they
rediscover things that
are really meaningful and really
true in all sense of the word,
then they have
something that they
can lay a groundwork
of their life upon.
>> REGINA: One of the things
I'm really encouraged about is
there are some new magazines
and journals coming out that are
more lifestyle oriented that
really promote a life much
closer to nature, whether
it's doing your own gardening,
knitting your own sweaters,
and whatever it is,
planting your own, be
attracting flowers.
That's really a
huge new trend right
now in the magazine business.
And one of my
favorites is called--
I think it called
"Mary Jane's Farm."
I absolutely love it--
great little articles
on living closer to Earth
and things that matter.
So I think that
trend is starting
to happen in earnest now because
people want to feel meaning
again, tired of just consuming,
consuming, consuming.
I asked this earlier, and we
didn't really talk about it--
do you have, in your
own mind, an idea
of what a green economy,
an organic, workable, green
economy can look like?
>> OGLE: Well, I certainly
do in my own mind,
and I could sketch
out that a little.
>> REGINA: Yeah, I'd like that.
>> OGLE: But I think that the
most important part would be
for us to co-create it so
that it works for everyone.
Most notably, some
examples could
serve as a starting point, and
then we need to go beyond that.
I've often touted the
work of William McDonough,
for instance.
He's known as the Green Dean
at the University of Virginia.
And he works with
various industries
to take what they had been doing
that might have been horribly
polluting and very
unsustainable and at least take
those first steps
towards making it
something that could be
sustainable into the future.
So for instance, his
three guiding principles
are use daily solar
incoming energy,
so renewable energy-- and
that's almost a no-brainer,
but it has to be accompanied
with other things.
One of the two other principles
he uses is waste equals food,
and what he really
means is that we
have to do away with the
idea of waste completely.
So in whatever we
do in our economy,
if there was a byproduct of
some process, manufacturing
or other, but it had
to be designed where
that byproduct was useful
for some other product
or some other process, then
we'd be fundamentally changing
our economy to begin with--
so if that really was the way
we designed things.
And then his last principle
was called honor diversity.
And there's a lot of
talk about honoring
human diversity these days,
which is absolutely necessary.
But what if we honor the
diversity of our whole place?
So in a region that we
lived, we honored the fact
that it has this climate
and these resources
and this kind of setting,
like topography and everything
about a place, the
animals and plants.
We would figure out ways
to live in that region,
in that place, that are far
different than how we do things
now.
And it would look a little
different everywhere
you go because of that.
So even though that's
not the be-all, end-all,
I think this kind of thinking
is the starting point
for designing a new economy.
And if kids get excited about
this and say, we can do this,
and we're going to arm ourselves
with both outlook and facts
that will help us do this, then
we're that much further ahead.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
And even the efforts,
even though we're not
going to get into a
political discussion here,
but even the efforts of
the new enthusiastic people
entering Congress and going
for the New Green Deal,
this is hopeful
that this is even
being brought into
the conversation,
as soon as they kind of
hop into their new seats
and are warming up their
seats in Congress, that they
want to hop on this notion
and make this such a priority.
And then, of course, you get
all the immature behavior
and backlash where the
news says, oh, we're
going to lose our hamburgers
and our way of life
and our milkshakes
and everything.
It's just, again,
this whole need
to have to divide
people into these really
almost caricature-ish camps.
That has to go.
We have to not support
these interests anymore.
I mean, that's a big one.
Just unplug.
Don't give them our money.
Don't give them our time.
Don't give them our attention.
But it is encouraging to
me that this is happening.
>> OGLE: Yeah.
And with the Green New Deal, if
we could accompany new thoughts
like that with new interests and
abilities to talk to each other
so that when we talk
about a Green New Deal
we know that we're talking about
an economy-- and an economy
isn't an evil thing inherently.
Whatever we do into the
future, our business
will be whatever
economy we produce.
And so our main idea is to
try to talk to each other
and figure out the best ways
to proceed rather than putting
each other in these
caricature-ish camps
that you describe.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
I mean, a bipartisan
committee on what would that
look like-- how can we begin
to incorporate industry
and our future economic growth
in with these principles that
are absolutely
needed at this time?
So I mean, to me
it's encouraging
that, even if it's all being
treated so ridiculously,
it's important that
it's even coming up.
>> OGLE: Yeah.
And I think it could go
faster if we did one thing,
and that is to make part
of our education system,
especially at the
high-school level,
not to not do it elsewhere,
but to get kids thinking about
whatever their career is,
whatever their own skills
and aptitudes are, that they not
only can but they must be part
of redesigning and
imagining a new economy--
>> REGINA: I agree.
>> OGLE: --rather than just
having some kids that maybe
think that they want to be
environmentally minded go
into some kind of environmental
science as if that, by itself,
would fix the world.
Yeah.
>> REGINA: Right.
If you love fashion and
you want to be a fashion
designer as a young
girl, figure out a way
to make it work so it
doesn't rely on $0.65 an hour
sweatshop workers, for
example, and hemp materials
and all of this.
I couldn't agree with you more.
High school educate--
that level where
people are lit up and ready to
choose, somewhat, some of them,
their path in life.
What a perfect way to
start planting those seeds.
>> OGLE: Yeah.
To do that, what we started
talking about with a Gaia
principle and the Gaia idea is
not an esoteric sideline thing.
It's understanding how this
world works as a living system,
and then understanding
ourselves as part of that,
and then getting into the really
complex emotional connections
that we have.
That's where we often venture
over into things like metaphor,
and myth, and
religion, et cetera,
that those things
are important, too,
to our ultimate aim to live well
on this Earth into the future.
>> REGINA: So what happens
with Darwinism at this point,
survival of the fittest,
dominance and so forth?
>> OGLE: Well, that's a really
interesting thing to bring up,
too, because I feel like
our current economy is still
basically running on
Social Darwinism--
>> REGINA: I agree.
>> OGLE: --that phrase that the
industrialists themselves came
up with to describe
what they were doing.
But it still is
the way we think.
It's that the world is simply
and only run on competition.
>> REGINA: Exactly.
>> OGLE: Competition is a
big part of how life works,
but the kind of Gaian
mirror image to that is that
we're also a symbiotic system.
So we have symbiosis,
in human terms,
cooperation, kind of
working with competition
and natural selection.
And Lynn Margulis, who is one
of the scientists who really
supported the Gaia
theory during her life,
had a phrase that she used, and
it went something like this--
it was, symbiosis wrote
the symphony of life,
and natural selection edited it.
>> REGINA: Edited it.
>> OGLE: Edited it.
And what that tells us is
that if we had a story that
accompanied how the world
really works that wasn't Social
Darwinism but was a social
understanding of ourselves
as part of a living
planet, then we'd
be in a completely
different place in order
to imagine ourselves
into the future.
>> REGINA: And in doing
so, we can't cut technology
and technological advancement
out of the argument.
>> OGLE: Yeah.
>> REGINA: Or the
debate, I should say.
>> OGLE: And of course,
technology could also be seen
for what it is.
Technology is everything we
do to manipulate and change
our world.
And so, for instance,
when we did education
about ancient cultures
at a nature center
that I used to work
at, we would talk
how an atlatl, a
spear-thrower, is a technology.
It really is.
It's not just that
technologies are computers.
It's everything that we design
and make and use that changes
our world.
>> REGINA: I don't know why
this is kind of flipping
into my head right now.
But I'm thinking
about here we look
at something like eBay
or Amazon or something
that was to allow the average
person to get together
with another person and sell
their goods directly and so
forth.
And now you have
incredible levels
of sabotage and
competition and people
scanning for sales
in a warehouse,
buying up the
inventory, putting it
on Amazon to sell for
a few dollar markup,
and then knocking
out their competition
by arranging for bad reviews
on their product and so forth.
It's like everything.
It comes down to this
whole notion, as you were
talking about, of competition.
At what point do we start
looking at cooperation
as our model for living?
Yeah, everybody wants to
have their share of the pie.
But do you have to have it
over every other person that's
offering a similar thing?
>> OGLE: Yeah.
>> REGINA: How do we work
that out in our minds?
How would you teach
this in high school?
>> OGLE: Well, as far as solving
something like that short term
with something as complex as
Google or Amazon, et cetera,
it's hard to say.
But there are some basic
tenets I think we could follow,
and that is that we can't keep
speeding up-- that's one--
and that we do have to
have balance and separation
of powers, if you will.
And so if it was up to
me, I would start teaching
in first grade, let alone
into high school, the idea
of the negative feedback loop.
>> REGINA: Talk about that.
>> OGLE: And the negative
feedback loop is how any system
works, whether it's our
body or a mechanical system.
It's where if you go too
far in one direction,
you're drawn back
towards a healthy center.
And then if you go
back the other way,
then you're drawn back
towards that healthy center.
A most familiar example would
be a thermostat, of course.
But in our own bodies,
say, our blood sugar
is regulated throughout the day
by our body sensing blood sugar
levels and kicking insulin
in and then stopping
the production of
insulin, et cetera.
And when and if that negative
feedback loop breaks down,
we're diseased.
We have diabetes.
And if we understood that that
is the way everything works,
then we could design systems
that don't go too fast
and don't consume too
much, et cetera, et cetera.
One of the points
of optimism I have
for being able to talk
to each other about this
is one time having seen in a
biology textbook the yin yang
symbol juxtaposed right next
to a negative feedback loop.
And it struck me that, yes,
these two are the same things,
that they're the idea of
living in a balance where
you don't go too
far out on the ends
and you restore to a center.
And there's a lot
of wisdom there,
and there's a lot of
scientific reality
there that we could build on.
>> REGINA: I absolutely agree.
And in terms of human
consciousness, the notion
of thriving without
it having to be
at the expense of
either nature or one
another is another
thing, I mean,
that has to start being
inculcated into our thinking.
We can all thrive.
This is a very
rich, complex world.
All of us have such interesting
areas of genius and talents
that we want to bring
forward, that there really
is room for everybody in
an organic-rich society.
Instead, it's being
kind of whittled down
to just a few positions that
you can train for in college.
And so to encourage that
richness, that unique divine
genius in each individual
expressing itself,
just the joy of that
expression hopefully
can start supplanting
the need to win
at the expense of someone else.
>> OGLE: And I do think
that that winning aspect,
that that competitive aspect
is not only a part of nature
overall, but it's a part
of our human nature,
but that we can't see
it as the only thing.
And therefore, if we also
see that part of our thriving
is a drawing back, as well--
we are awake during the
day, and then we sleep,
and we eat, and then we have
had enough, and we stop eating.
And that's where the joy
in that comes from, not
from continuing
to stuff yourself.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> OGLE: So if we can get
in the mindset that thriving
in our culture means that we
might have all sorts of nice
things and consume
to a certain point,
but there is a point beyond
which we as both individuals
and a society, somehow as
we work things out together,
have to draw back from that.
And yeah, that's my
kind of hope for--
>> REGINA: It's my hope, too.
And the notion of
competition, I don't think
there's anything wrong with
kind of healthy competition
that's in this kind of good
sported way between people.
But that's not what
we're talking about here.
Our culture has gone
a different way,
and it's that kind
of winning over
someone versus just
doing your very best
and thriving that
I'm talking about.
And I think you are, as well.
And a little bit ago, you said--
this isn't an esoteric concept
you were talking about,
but I'm going to take it
into an esoteric arena.
And if you're not
comfortable with it,
just say, hey, not
my wheelhouse, OK?
So it's been said by some
of the fairly well-known,
more spiritual guides and so
forth that the changes that are
happening on Earth--
remember everything around
the turn of the century?
We were going to go through
a polarity shift, and life
as we knew it would
be over and so forth.
That hasn't happened.
Yes, Earth does go
through pole shifts.
It will happen sooner or later.
But I remember in
one session from--
this is more intuitive
or soul group guidance.
They said, much of
what was forecast
by Edgar Cayce and
people such as him, Ruth
Montgomery and others,
those channels,
to happen on this Earth in
terms of the Earth changes
and where they would
occur would actually not
occur as a result of the
shift of the consciousness
of the people on that land.
So what does that mean
to you, if anything?
>> OGLE: Well, the particular
prophecies and how things are
going to shift I'm
not as familiar with.
But the idea that
things can change
if our consciousness changes
I resonate with greatly.
That's what we've been
talking about here mostly,
I guess, if that was
the outlook of all of us
that we don't have to be
stuck in these mental ruts,
no matter who we
are, whether we're
on the left, the right, the
scientific, the spiritual,
and work our best to find
common understanding.
We still might end
up disagreeing,
but at least it'd be better
to have a common understanding
about what we disagree about.
What could that
consciousness change be?
I think it's almost precisely
what we've talked about
so far, that we don't have to
always live in the same way
that we live.
That alone could go miles.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
>> OGLE: And then it does
become more complex beyond that.
In other words, we have many
multiple emotional things
in our human existence that make
it not a black and white issue.
But that further
implies that we have
to talk to each other
about those things
so that we don't go off the deep
end in one way or the other.
You know, that
matter of our culture
becoming overly competitive--
I do believe that's the case.
But I think that if you go just
about anywhere in the country
and you talk to people
about how they are raised
and their own
values and so forth,
that you'd still find a lot
of cooperative understanding,
as well.
So even very conservative
traditional cultures
are going to have in it
caring for one another
and the golden rule firmly
in their consciousness.
>> REGINA: It's mostly when you
get to the subject of economics
where it's really afflicted.
>> OGLE: Yeah.
And there it seems like we
have no mechanisms by which we
can say, can we work
this out without fighting
over the goodies?
>> REGINA: Right, exactly.
>> OGLE: Yeah.
>> REGINA: So do you think we
have to say goodbye to the day
of the 3,000-mile Caesar salad?
>> OGLE: Oh, the
3,000-miles Caesar salad.
I think that would be a great
thing to work our way back
to much more local food.
Yeah, definitely.
And right now, it'd be very
difficult to do it overnight,
especially, say,
here in Colorado
where I think the figure is
that we only eat 4% of our food
here comes from Colorado.
So we're a long
ways from creating
a food system that would feed
us here, even in Boulder County.
Part of that is
recognizing that we live
in a really arid environment.
And so we'd have
to maybe not expect
to have so much
food created there.
But the other one would
be developing mechanisms
by which we can produce a
healthy, sustainable food here,
as well.
>> REGINA: What, also,
about the notion of grazing?
Just we only have a
few minutes left--
kind of looking
into that subject
because you have every kind of
argument and counterargument
and such coming out about it.
What is your position on
grazing and ultimately
where we have to go
with our food sources
out of concern for
our interrelationship
with the Earth?
>> OGLE: Grazing in terms of--
>> REGINA: Cattle grazing--
>> OGLE: --meat production.
>> REGINA: --for meat
industries and such,
without getting political
about it because every body is
different and needs
different things.
I get that.
>> OGLE: Yeah.
Well, my sense on the
idea of animal agriculture
is very similar to a lot of
what we've been talking about.
A, let's talk to each
other and figure out
the best ways of doing things
and not fight with each other
and leave all the solutions
left at the wayside.
And right now, my own
personal read on it
is that we can't eat
meat at the level
that we're doing it now
across the Earth and more
and more meat because
it just won't work.
We're going to despoil the
land upon which we depend.
However, it doesn't
mean necessarily
that we can't eat any meat.
And also, we should remember
that the grazing of ungulates
was and is a part of the
land all across our world
and that if you biomimic the
way that wild ungulates live
that you can, in fact, improve
soil quality in an area
if we don't expect
too much from it.
So we can produce some meat for
people, probably plenty of meat
for people, and still improve
the quality of the land
there if we do it right.
But that won't work if we expect
more and more and more steaks
and hamburgers.
>> REGINA: OK.
I think that's a very
rational answer to that.
And do you believe
that there is a place,
again, more on almost a
psycho-spiritual level,
for real communication between
communion between ourselves
and nature, real
clarity of communion?
What do you see as the
importance of that in society,
now, reintroducing that?
>> OGLE: Yeah.
I do think it's
possible for us to have
a communion with nature.
And in my own mind,
that's a recognition
that we are nature, that
we came out of this Earth,
and that we're a seamless
part of Earth as a whole.
And if we do that,
when we recognize
that we can be in nature
when we're inside,
but we can also be
outside more to be
in contact with those forces and
situations that we grew up in.
Our ancestors probably spent 95%
of their waking hours outside.
So maybe we could benefit
from that kind of situation.
But we can do so by
letting our minds
be open to lots of different
ways of connecting,
which would include a rational
thought about things, which
would include a non-rational
contemplation about life,
a mix of the two.
Slowing down, I think,
is a part of it.
>> REGINA: That's a big one for
you is just slow the heck down.
>> OGLE: That slowing down--
I think we're way off the charts
in terms of our pace of life.
So we can't even consider
how to do any of the above.
>> REGINA: And one of the things
that's been proven in brain
science is the
role of gratitude.
Does that have any
resonance for what you're
saying in this whole matrix?
>> OGLE: Boy, that has a lot
of resonance for me in both,
I guess you might call,
rational and non-rational ways.
First, just expressing gratitude
changes our way of being.
It puts us in a
different mindset.
And there's a woman named
Janine Benyus who came up
with the term
"biomimicry," and it's
become quite big these days.
And a lot of what we
talk about in biomimicry
is how to produce a
process or a product
based on looking at
something in nature.
But when she was
asked one time how
we could show self-restraint
in human life, what
is the biomimetic way
that we would do that,
her answer was by showing
thanks and gratitude.
She said it was our
human way of becoming
more attuned to the
cycles of life around us.
>> REGINA: I think
that's a perfect answer,
and we're out of time, and
we couldn't have ended it any
better.
Martin, thank you so
much for your work,
and I do hope that
we can slow down,
we can begin talking to
each other, both rationally
and in terms of the magic of
what we can create together.
As you said, this has to
be a co-creative process.
And so for mothers and
fathers, it's up to us
to start teaching our
children these principles
from the time they can talk.
>> OGLE: Right.
Thank you.
>> REGINA: Thank
you so much, Martin.
To learn more about this
incredibly important work,
you can go to
entrepreneurialearth.com.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[MUSIC PLAYING]